PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF 3D CNN MODELS IN CLASSIFYING THE SEVERITY OF ALZHEIMER'S DEMENTIA ON BRAIN MRI IMAGES


Alzheimer's disease is a type of dementia caused by damage to neurons in the brain that affects memory, language and thinking functions. Manual diagnosis is prone to subjectivity and time-consuming. Thus, a 3D CNN model is needed to classify the severity of alzheimer's disease. However, 3D CNN models have a very complex architecture, causing computation time to be long. Therefore, this research compares the performance of 3D CNN models, namely 3D ResNet, 3D ResNeXt + Bi-LSTM, and 3D CNN + CLSTM. Thus, it can determine the optimal model for classifying alzheimer's severity. The dataset used is obtained from the ADNI database. Model performance is measured based on confusion matrix, accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and computation time.
The results show that the 3D ResNet model has the highest training accuracy of 99.54% and test performance of 98.67% for all performance metrics. The 3D ResNeXt + Bi-LSTM model has a test performance of 99.33% on all performance metrics and the fastest inference time of 0.0182 seconds/sample. With a simpler model architecture than the other models, the 3D CNN + CLSTM model showed 100% test performance on all performance metrics. In addition, this model has the fastest training computation time of 32.72 seconds/epoch. Thus, models with simple architectures can still provide optimal performance while reducing training computation time compared to models with more complex architectures.
